AI #2084: Add context for Gemini Code Assist (#2157)
FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec: AGENTS.md

### Requirements Model (JSON Validation Rules)

The `specification/requirements_model/` directory contains a machine-readable representation of spec requirements:

* `model_rules/` - JSON files defining validation rules (organized by attributes/, columns/, datasets/)
* `build_json.py` - Merges all JSON into `build/model-<version>.json`
* `tests/` - 32+ pytest tests validating rule structure and dependencies

**Rule ID Format**: `<ArtifactName>-<Type>-<NumericId>-<Status>`

* Types: C (Column), A (Attribute), D (Dataset)
* Status: M (Mandatory), O (Optional), C (Conditional)
* Example: `ListUnitPrice-C-001-M`

## Writing Specification Content & Review Guidelines

AI agents generating or reviewing content MUST act as strict technical editors enforcing the FOCUS standards. Focus entirely on specification documents, schema definitions, and markdown formatting. 

### Normative Language & Requirements

* Use BCP-14 keywords: MUST, MUST NOT, SHOULD, SHOULD NOT, MAY (all uppercase).
* "REQUIRED", "SHALL", and "SHALL NOT" are deprecated; use MUST/MUST NOT instead.
* "RECOMMENDED" is deprecated as a normative keyword; use SHOULD instead.

> * "OPTIONAL" is deprecated; use MAY instead.

Reviewer: This is using a lot of tokens to say we shouldn't use these. We don't need to say what to use instead, it can figure that out.
```suggestion
* DO NOT use: "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "OPTIONAL"
```

* **Single Constraint:** Each normative bullet MUST express exactly one requirement. Do not combine multiple distinct obligations using "and"/"or", though these conjunctions are permitted within conditional clauses and mathematical validations.
* **Conditional Phrasing:** Normative statements with conditions MUST use standard phrasing: "when / if / unless / only when / only if / except when / except if".
* **State vs Behavior:** Normative requirements MUST describe a verifiable state, not an operational behavior. Do not use process-oriented verbs (e.g., *ensure*, *handle*, *support*, *provide*) as the primary constraint, though they MAY appear in conditional clauses.
* **Structural Anchors:** Requirements sections MUST begin with a non-verifiable anchor phrase ending in a colon (e.g., `<Entity> MUST adhere to the following requirements:`).

### Editorial Conventions

* **Column/Attribute IDs:** PascalCase without spaces (e.g., PricingQuantity). Entity IDs SHOULD be used in normative text sections.
* **Column/Attribute Display Names:** Normal text with spaces (e.g., "Pricing Quantity"). These SHOULD be used in introductory or explanatory non-normative text.

> * **No Mixing:** Do not mix Entity IDs and Display Names within the same sentence.

Reviewer: nit: Paragraph? Section? 🤔

Author: Looks like that's AI tripping up on @jpradocueva's statement in #2111 of:

> * **Consistent Reference Type:** MUST NOT mix Entity IDs and Display Names within the same statement.

I will recommend Joaquin rephrase that guideline.  In the meantime, how about this?

```suggestion
* **No Mixing:** Do not mix Entity IDs and Display Names within the same normative requirement.
```

* **Column values:** Enclosed in double quotes (e.g., `"Usage"`, `"Tax"`).
* **Glossary terms:** Link with `[*term*](#glossary:term)` format.

> * **Linking Rule:** First mention of Column/Attribute names and Glossary terms should link to their definition section. They MUST ONLY be hyperlinked the *first occurrence* per section.

Reviewer: Isn't this per file, not just per section? Maybe the question is about what "section" means. I interpret that as anything with a header. Also added more precision.
```suggestion
* **Linking Rule:** First mention of Column/Attribute names and Glossary terms in a file MUST be italicized and link to their definition section (`[*term*](#{anchor})`). ALL other references MUST be italicized and MUST NOT be linked (`*term*`).
```

Author: Gemini's recommendation was: give me an executive summary of the guidelines, because it's not guaranteed that an LLM will refer to the guidelines themselves.

So I fed it the latest round of guidelines.  In #1967, @ijurica has authored:

> The structural anchor requirement:
> 
> * introduces the scope of the subsequent normative requirements,
> * MUST appear as the first normative statement in the section,
> * exists to support automated parsing and validation, and
> * is non-verifiable and does not introduce an enforceable constraint.

Propose no action here.  I recommend you leave a comment on #1967 if that verbiage doesn't work for you.  If/when we accept that change, we can update the language here.

Author: Resolving with no action.  We can iterate if necessary.

- Status: M (Mandatory), O (Optional), C (Conditional)
- Example: `ListUnitPrice-C-001-M`

## Writing Specification Content & Review Guidelines

AI agents generating or reviewing content MUST act as strict technical editors enforcing the FOCUS standards. Focus entirely on specification documents, schema definitions, and markdown formatting. 

### Normative Language & Requirements

- Use BCP-14 keywords: MUST, MUST NOT, SHOULD, SHOULD NOT, MAY (all uppercase).
- "REQUIRED", "SHALL", and "SHALL NOT" are deprecated; use MUST/MUST NOT instead.
- "RECOMMENDED" is deprecated as a normative keyword; use SHOULD instead.
- "OPTIONAL" is deprecated; use MAY instead.
- **Location:** Normative keywords MUST ONLY appear under a "Requirements" header. Flag any normative keywords leaking into "Description", "Examples", or other non-normative sections.
- **Format:** Write normative statements as bullet lists, not lengthy sentences.

> - **Single Constraint:** Each normative bullet MUST express exactly one requirement. Do not combine multiple constraints with "and"/"or".

Author: ```suggestion
- **Single Constraint:** Each normative bullet MUST express exactly one requirement. Do not combine multiple distinct obligations (e.g., multiple verifiable states or subjects) using "and"/"or", though these conjunctions are permitted within conditional clauses and mathematical validations.
```

- **Conditional Phrasing:** Normative statements with conditions MUST use standard phrasing: "when / if / unless / only when / only if / except when / except if".

> - **State vs Behavior:** Normative requirements MUST describe a verifiable state, not an operational behavior. Do not use process-oriented verbs like *ensure*, *handle*, *support*, or *provide*.

Author: ```suggestion
- **State vs Behavior:** Normative requirements MUST describe a verifiable state, not an operational behavior. Do not use process-oriented verbs (e.g., *ensure*, *handle*, *support*, *provide*) as the primary constraint, though they MAY appear in conditional clauses.
```

> - **Structural Anchors:** Requirements sections MUST begin with a non-verifiable anchor phrase ending in a colon (e.g., `<Entity> MUST adhere to the following requirements:`).

Author: Did this globally.  Resolving.

### Editorial Conventions

> - **Column/Attribute IDs:** PascalCase without spaces (e.g., `PricingQuantity`). Entity IDs MUST be used in normative text sections.

Author: Accepting.

- **Column/Attribute Display Names:** Normal text with spaces (e.g., "Pricing Quantity"). These SHOULD be used in introductory or explanatory non-normative text.
- **No Mixing:** Do not mix Entity IDs and Display Names within the same sentence.
- **Column values:** Enclosed in double quotes (e.g., `"Usage"`, `"Tax"`).
- **Glossary terms:** Link with `[*term*](#glossary:term)` format.
- **Linking Rule:** First mention of Column/Attribute names and Glossary terms should link to their definition section. They MUST ONLY be hyperlinked the *first occurrence* per section.
- **Lists:** All unordered lists MUST use asterisks (`*`), never dashes (`-`) or plus signs (`+`). Nested bullet points MUST use exactly two spaces per level.

> - **Notes:** Important notes must use the blockquote format (`> Important Consideration`).

Author: Did this globally.  Resolving.

### Validation & Schema Accuracy

- **Mathematical & Schema Accuracy:** AI reviewers MUST rigorously calculate, parse, and verify all data within examples (especially JSON snippets and tables). Flag any mathematical inconsistencies or hallucinated data.
- **JSON Formatting:** JSON blocks MUST use double quotation marks for keys. Verify that the JSON is structurally valid.

> - **Example Disclaimer:** Any section containing examples MUST include the exact warning note: `> Note: The following examples are informative and non-normative. They do not define requirements.`

Author: Did this globally.  Resolving.
